R\-99014/59/2021\-NLM-DADF

Government of India

Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying

To

The Pay and Account Officer (Sect.I),

Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying, K.rishi Bhawan, Room No.35,

ew Delhi\-110001

Krishi Bhawan,	ew Delhi Dated 18th March, 2024

Subject: Release of amount for interest subventions under Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIOF) scheme to designated banks (Punjab National Bank, Canara Bank, Axis Bank, Bank of Baroda, HDFC Bank and Yes Bank) du.ring the year 2023\-24\.  
Sir,

I am directed to convey the sanction of the President of India for payment of **Rs.**

**1,68,62,349**/\- **(Rupees One Crores Sixty Eight Lakhs Sixty Two Thousand Three Hundred Forty Nine only) out of Rs 24,92,86,849** /- under the Central Sector Scheme "Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund" (AHIDF) as Interest Subvention @ 3% to designated banks (Punjab  ational Bank, Canara Bank, Axis Bank, Bank of Baroda, HDFC Bank and Yes Bank) as per Cabinet approval of the scheme.

2. It is requested that the sanctioned amount of **Rs. 1,68,62,349** /\- **(Rupees One Crores Sixty Eight Lakhs Sixty Two Thousand Three Hundred Forty Nine only)** may please be paid by RTGS to designated banks to provide Interest Subvention to the entrepreneurs@ 3 % of the loan amount for the projects sanctioned under AHIDF as per the table below:

| s. No | Application No. | Project Name | Category | Project Location | Lendin gBank | Project Cost (Rs. In Lakh) | Loan IAmounc (Rs. In Lakh) | FY | 3% Interest Subvention ( Rs in INR) |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | :---- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| **27th PAC dated 21st September 2023** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 1 | .AHD0323000 7590 | Paras Nutrition Pvt Ltd | Animal Feed Plant | Kamal Haryana | Axis Bank | 4041 | 3000 | 22-23 and 23-24 | 49,98,414/- |
| **29th PAC dated 28.12.2023 and 9thPSC dated 11.01.2024** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 2 | AI ID0223000 6683 | Star Foods | Meat processing and value addition | Ludhiana Punjab | Punjab National Bank | 9667 | 7000 | 23\-24 | 39,51,396/- |
| **30th PAC dated 23rd February 2024** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3 | AI-1D0323000 7088 | AOVAgro Foods Private Lrd | Breed Tmprovemen r Technology and Breed Multiplicatio | Gurdaspur, Punjab | HDFC Bank | 501 | 448 | 22\-23 | 5,86,136/\- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 23\-24 | 11,23,002/\- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | **Tota 1** | **17,09,138/\-** |

|  |  |  | n Farm |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | :---- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| 4 | AHD0323000 7091 | AOV Agro Foods Private Ltd | Meat process1I1g and value addition | Mewat, Haryana | HDFC Bank | 1949 | 950 | 22-23 | 9,28,367/- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 23-24 | 19,71,543/\- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | **Tota** I | **28,99,910/\-** |
| 5 | AHD1122000 4996 | Usha Pam1s | Breed lmprovemen t Technology and Breed Multiplicatio nFarm | Annamayya, Andhra Pradesh | Canara Bank | 290.77 | 200 | 22-23 | 74,151/- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 23-24 | 5,42,313/- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | **Tota** I | **6,16,464/\-** |
| 6 | AHD0323000 7202 | Ambaji Enterprises (Rakesh Kumar) | Dairy Processing and Value Addition | Una, Himachal Pradesh | Bank of Baroda | 296 | 218 | 23-24 | 2,54,042/\- |
| 7 | AHD0123000 5903 | Crcamlinc Dairy Products Limited | Dairy Processing and Value Addition | Malkajgiri, Telangana | HDFC Bank | 715 | 518 | 21\-22 | 8,515/- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 22-23 | 13,58,863/- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 23\-24 | 8,42,637/\- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | **Tota** I | **22,10,015**/ \- |
| 8 | AHD0323000 7538 | Abis Parivartan Gen NxtMa | Breed Improvemen t Technology and Breed Multiplicatio nFarm | Sehore, Madhya Pradesh | Yes Bank | 412 | 275 | 23\-24 | 2,22,970/\- |
|  | **Total** |  |  |  |  |  |  | **1,68,62,349**/ \- |  |

3. The expenditure of designated banks will be debited to:

   Demand No 44

   2403

   00103

   27

   270033

   : Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying

   : (Gen)\-Animal Husbandry (Major Head)

   : Minor head \- Poultry development

   : Infrastructure Development Fund

   : Subsidies

4. This interest subvention is paid to designate banks for the above\-mentioned year for onward transmission for eligible entities for which the loan under AHIDF has been sanctioned by the respective bank for which the interest subvention has been approved. The concerned Bank is requested to transfer the interest subvention amount to the beneficiary within a time period not exceeding 3 days (T\+3 days modeD from the receipt of the interest subvention amount.

5. Funds being released by Government of India are to be managed and utilized by designated banks for the Interest Subvention under "Animal Husbandry Infrast:J:ucture Development Fund" in accordance with implementation guidelines of AHIDF during the year 2023\-24\.

6. Further, the Bank should ensure that the interest subvention should not be released to projects which become ineligible during the course of Scheme/NP A projects.

7. This release is further subjected to the following terms and conditions of General Financial

Rules-2017.

1) In terms of rule 236(1) of General Financial Rules, 2017, the account of Grantee Institutions or organizations shall be open to inspections by the sanctioning authority and audit both by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and under the provision of CAG (DPC), 1971 and under audit by the Principal Accounts Office of the Department, whenever the Institution/Organization call to do so.

   2) The Banks shall submit an audited certificate of actually utilization subsidy sanctioned in prescribed Proforma (GFR-12 A) specifying report on targets and achievements cum performance report in terms of rule 212 (3) General financial Rule, 2017 to the sanctioning Authority.

   3) Performance-cum\-Achievement report should also be submitted after utilization of this amount.

   4) The assets acquired wholly or substantially out of the Government funds, except those declared as obsolete and unserviceable or condemned in accordance with the procedure duly laid down in GFR, shall not be disposed of without obtaining the prior approval of authority which sanctioned the grant.

8. Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying reserve the rights to modify, add and delete any terms/ conditions without assigning any reasons and its interpretation of various terms will be final. It also reserves the right to recall any amount given under the scheme without assigning any reason thereon.

9. Any other operational instructions issued by DAI-ID, GOI from time to time will be strictly followed.

10. The designated banks are also requested to ensure registration of all the implementing agencies till last levels and use of Expenditure, Advance and Transfer (EA1) module of Public Financial Management System (PFMS) for flow of funds so that effective monitoring of funds utilization can be done as per the Rule 232 (v) of GFR, 2017\.

11. A statement indicating the status of the funds available witl1 the designated banks with regard Animal Husbandry and Daiiying need to be submitted to GOT on quarterly/ annually.

12. Drawing & Disbursing Officer (DDO) of the ministry is authorized to prefer the bill to the Pay & Accounts Officer for the releases of **Rs. 1,68,62,349** /- **(Rupees One Crores Sixty Eight Lakhs Sixty Two Thousand Three Hundred Forty Nine only)** to designated banks through RTGS as per the Bank details given below.

| SL No. | Name of the Bank | Bank Account No. | Branch address | IFSC Code | Amount (In Rs) |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | ----- |
| 1 | Axis Bank Ltd. | 922020040120459 | A wing 1st Floor, 12, Mittal Tower, Free Press Joumal Marge, Nariman Point, Mumbai\-400021 | UTIB0001394 | 49,98,414/\- |
| 2 | Canara Bank | 9921201005875 | Canara Bank Stock Exchange Towers Bangalore | CNRB0008693 | 6,16,464/\- |
| 3 | HDFC Bank | 02400930000063 | Mumbai Sandoz House Branch, Mumbai | HDFC0000240 | 68,19,063/- |

I

| 4 | Punjab National Bank | 152200210002716 5 | Plot No4 Sector 10 Dwarka DI Newdl 110075 | PU  B0847700 | 39,51,396/- |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | ----- |
| 5 | Yes Bank Ltd. | 000189900003182 | Worli Branch, Mumbai | YESB000000l | 2,22,970/- |
| 6 | Bank of Baroda | 01880200001402 | Baroda Bhawan Vadodara | BARB0ALKAP u | 2,54,042/- |
| 7 |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | Total | **Rs. 1,68,62,349**/\- **(Rupees One Crores Sixty Eight Lakhs Sixty Two Thousand Three Hundred Fortv Nine only)** |  |  |  |

13. The sanction issue in exercise of the powers conferred on this Department in consultation with the  Integrated  Finance  Branch/  Finance  Branch  vide  their  U.O.  o.  note  \# 307/20173/ AS\&FA dated 14.03.2024\.

14. This has been noted as per GFR 234 (i) at S. No. 24 at page No. 65 of the register of grants under the AHIDF for 2023\-24\.

15. As per point (i) of para no. 7 of OM No. 1 (18)/PMS/FCD/2021 dated 18.04.2023 and 09\.03.2022, the 3% Interest Subvention which is provided as reimbursement of interest claimed against the loan disbursed to the eligible entity, has already been exempted and circulated by

Department of Expenditure vide letter F. o. 3 /(26)/ PFMS/2022, dated 101h July, 2023 under AHIDF

16. The nature of Grant is recurring.

Copy for information to:

Yours faithfully,

(Anamika Nigam) Under Secretary to the Government of India

1. Joint Secretary, Department of Financial Services,	orth Block, New Delhi

2. Principal Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandty, Haryana, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.

3. Chief General Manager (Punjab National Bank, Canara Bank, Axis Bank, Bank of Baroda, HDFC Bank and Yes Bank).

4. The Principal Accounts Officer, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Ashoka Road, Patel Chowk, ew Delhi, Delhi 110001\.

5. Chief General Manager, Department of Refinance, absanrakshan Trustee Private Limited (NTPL), Mumbai, C-24, 'G' Block, Bandra\-Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mwnbai \- 400 051\.

6. Deputy General Manager, SIDBI, Atma Ram House, 1 Tolstoy Marg, New Delhi\-110001

7. Accountant General, Commerce, Works and Miscellaneous, AGCR Building, Near ITO, ew Delhi\-110 002\.

8. Chief Controller of Accounts, Deptt. of Agr.i .&Coopn., Krish.iBhavan (Room No.242).

   

9. Under  ecretary, IFD, Deptt. of AHD, Krishi Bhavan,	ew Delhi.

10. AC (Budget), Deptt. of AH, Krishi Bhavan,	ew Delhi, for information.

11. PS to JS (A  Livl)/ JC (Poul)/ DC (AHIDF)

12. System Analyst,	TIC, DADF with kind request to upload the reply on Department's Website

13. Guard file.

