[]

  Ref. No. NB. HO/ GSD / 39390 /AMI -3 /2025-26 10 June 2025

  Circular No: 149 /GSD-3 /2025

  The Chairman/ Chief Executive Officer/ Managing Director All Scheduled Commercial Banks

  State Cooperative Bank/

  State Cooperative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks/ Regional Rural Bank/ Scheduled Primary Urban Cooperative Bank Other institutions eligible for refinance from NABARD

  Madam/Dear Sir,

Subject: Suspension of Implementation of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) Sub-Scheme of ISAM till further advice

  The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, GoI vide their Order F. No. M11011/12/New Scheme/2019 -AMI (Pt. 2) - Part (1) (115686) dated 10 June 2025 (copy enclosed) has informed that the allocated budget under the Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) Sub-Scheme of the Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) has been fully utilized. Accordingly, it has been decided by Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Govt. of India that the implementation of the AMI Sub Scheme of ISAM is kept in abeyance with immediate effect, i.e. from 10 June 2025.

2.  No new sanctions under the AMI Sub scheme of ISAM may be made until fresh budgetary allocations are communicated by the competent authority.

3.  The ENSURE portal has been disabled temporarily for submission of new AMI claims and the pending claims at all levels may be kept in abeyance till further orders from DMI, Gol.

4.  []You may, accordingly, please advise your Controlling Offices/Regional Offices/Zonal Offices/ District Central Cooperative Banks (in case of State Cooperative Banks) and branches under your jurisdiction.

  Encl: as above

  31l'{'!Jllfturfc1cfimctcfi'

  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development _

  fu'ITTTT

1.  m-24, '-# . - - (i<t). - 400 051.•ffl +91 22 2652 4926•ffl +9122 2653 0090• t-lIB • dor@nabard.org

  DepartmentofRefinance

Plot No. C-24, 'G' Block, Bandra-Kurla Complex, Bandra (E), Mumbai - 400 051.• Tel.: +9122 2652 4926• Fax: +91222653 0090• E-mail: dor@nabard.org

'l'JTq >><ff[] \\WW.nabard.org 'D '# f / nahardonliru, Taking Rural India>> Forward

  F. No. M-11011/12/New Scheme/2019-AMl(Pt-2)-Part(1) (115686)

Government of India

  Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Agricultural Marketing Division)

478, Krishi Shawan, New Delhi

Dated:10.06.2025.

  To,

(i) Joint Agricultural Marketing Adviser (Jt-AMA) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection

  DMI Faridabad.

(ii) The Chairman, NASARD,

  Sandra Kurla Complex, Sandra East, Mumbai-400 051.

  Subject: Sanction of subsidy for new projects under Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure sub scheme of ISAM-reg.

  Sir/Madam,

  I am directed to inform that the allocated budget under Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) Sub Scheme of ISAM, has been fully utilized, and no further funds are available. Hence the implementation of AMI Sub Scheme of ISAM may be kept in abeyance.

2.  No new sanction may be issued till budgetary provision is communicated.

3.  This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.

Yours faithfully

-

.,

•

JI

.o

,i

  Sfngh) Under Secretary to Govt. f India [e-mail: pankaj.singh@gov.in]

(Tel No.23381557)
