

*“हम सब ͧमलकर एक काम कर सकते हɇ। हम संकãप करɅ ͩक इस वष\[ ĤǓतपदा से अगले वष\[ ĤǓतपदा तक, हर*

*िजले मɅ 75 अमृत सरोवर बनाएंगे।”*

\-	*Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India*

Water is one of the most important natural resources. It is an invaluable gift from nature to the entire human race. Two-third of the earth is covered with water, but only two to three percent of available water is usable. Today, many countries of the world, including India, are facing acute water crisis. Realizing the same problem, Hon’ble Prime Minister has called for the construction of 75 Amrit Sarovars (ponds) in each district of the country.

Amrit Sarovars will play an important role in increasing the availability of water, both on surface and under-ground. Development of Amrit Sarovars is also an apt symbol of constructive actions, dedicated to the country on the occasion of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, marking 75 years of Independence from colonial rule, that create sustainable and long term productive assets, beneficial to both the sentient beings and environment.

Objective of Mission Amrit Sarovar is “construction/development of **at least 75 Amrit Sarovar (ponds) in every district** of the country”. Each Amrit Sarovar will have pondage area of minimum of 1 acre (0.4 hectare) with water holding capacity of **about 10,000 cubic meter**.

All rural districts will develop having **at least 75 Amrit Sarovars** totalling about **50,000 Amrit Sarovars** in the country.

Mission Amrit Sarovar will be launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister on the eve of National Panchayat Day on 24th April 2022\. This exercise would be begun as early as possible so as to complete a substantial number of structures by August 15, 2022\. Those States, which may find it difficult to adhere to the above timeline on account of early rains or other such factors, e.g. the states in the North-East, may seek permission for following a different timeline within the

financial year 2022-2023. In any case, all such Amrit Sarovars should be completed by end of Amrit Varsh i.e. 15thAugust 2023\.

This Mission would be run with a “Whole of Government” approach in all its aspects, accordingly a wide swath of Ministries/Departments and Organizations would work together to accomplish the goals. Following Ministries and Organizations have agreed to participate:

1. Ministry of Rural Development (Dept. of Rural Development/ Dept. of Land Resources)

2. Ministry of Jal Shakti (Dept. of Water Resources/ Dept. of Drinking Water & Sanitation)

3. Ministry of Culture

4. Ministry of Panchayati Raj

5. Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change

6. Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-informatics (BISAG-N)

   1. ### **Minimum Pondage area of 1acre (0.4 hectare) :**

      1. This Amrit Sarovar will be constructed on at least 1 acre of land with a water holding capacity of about 10,000 cubic meters.  
      2. If the district is unable to create as many new Amrit Sarovars, then district may take up rejuvenation of the existing structures for restoring their ecological and productive utility.

   2. ***75 Amrit Sarovars per district:***

At least 75 Amrit Sarovars in every district, totalling about 50,000 Amrit Sarovar will be constructed or rejuvenated in the country. However, there would be no bar to the district taking more such structures.

3. #### ***Site selection and approval:***

   1. In order to optimize the benefit of the Amrit Sarovars and to ensure that the implementation is done in the most credible manner, latest and most relevant technologies like remote sensing and geospatial will be used extensively from site selection till its completion.  
      2. “Amrit Sarovar” Portal developed by Bhaskaracharya National Institute of Space Application and Geomatics-National (BISAG-N) is utilised to generate list of potential sites, monitor progress and upload media.  
      3. A list of about 100 potential sites will be generated by BISAG-N for every district on the basis of :

         1. New sites: availability of wastelands and rainwater; topography; Soil (depth/depth) type); geology. In particular following factors will be kept in view:

            * Availability of Land (Wasteland)

            * Availability of Rain Water through drainage

            * Topography \- Depression, Low Lying Area (preferable)

            * Soil depth \- Deep

            * Soil type  \- Neither Alkaline, nor Saline, nor Acidic

            * Geology – No Lineament/ fault etc. at the site

         2. Rejuvenation: Realizable additional capacity

         3. Keeping in mind the distance from residential areas and infrastructural works

      4. District may also receive suggestions from public representatives, PRIs, members of public, civil society organisations, academic and research bodies etc. on potential sites. The Amrit Sarovar portal can be used to generate technical parameters of each such suggested site. On the basis of this exercise, a list of about 100 potential sites should be generated. While finalising the sites, district may provide focus on water stressed blocks, especially with reference to drinking water.  
      5. Each such site would be visited by joint teams of both technical and administrative officials to examine both technical and administrative feasibility. Such teams would be constituted by the district administration drawing upon the manpower drawn from all relevant agencies, so as to complete it in the shortest time possible. The teams would hold discussions with all relevant stakeholders including downstream farmers, potential users and also visiting the catchment area, drainage channels etc. Apart from commenting upon feasibility of sites, the teams would also report on other associated actions needed such as removal of encroachment, treatment of gray water, disputes

      etc. On the basis of this exercise, the potential sites would be ranked on objective parameters and 75 top ranked sites would be selected. The list may be got vetted, if required, by appropriate decision making structures applicable to the district.

      6. The sites of the Sarovars located in the villages of freedom fighters and martyrs should be prioritized.  
      7. Amrit Sarovar sites located in the forest areas, may be constructed after due clearance from concerned forest agency. Amrit Sarovars in forest areas, may either be constructed by forest department themselves. If no such arrangement is possible, then NOC may be provided to the agency, which may be entrusted with the work.  
      8. The districts should draw up an **Action Plan** for Mission Amrit Sarovar, which should include detail of sites for Amrit Sarovars, sources of funding, executing agencies, agencies/supervisors responsible for monitoring and documentation, timeline for activities, manner of citizen mobilisation and celebration of creation of Amrit Sarovars etc.  
      9. Development proposal may also include removal of encroachments both at the Amrit Sarovar site as well as in the catchment and drainage, treatment of gray water flowing to it.  
      10. Special care would be taken to ensure treatment of bund around the structure by ensuring layerwise compaction, including through use of machinery, turfing and appropriate slope thereof.  
      11. ***Common Signage (Board and Logo) :***To mark the occasion, an information board will also be put up at every Amrit Sarovar in which all the information related to the work will be available to the public. Information board will have a common signage (Board) of standard size (: 5 feet height, 4 feet width) and common logo, the design of board and logo will be shared subsequently.

12. ### **The site of Amrit Sarovars will be approved by special Gram Sabha, which will also name Panchayat Partinidhi, who will on its behalf supervise development of Amrit Sarovar**.

    4. #### ***Plantation:***

       6.4.1. Commemorative plantation of tree such as नीम (*Azadirachta Indica*),पीपल (*Ficus Religiosa*), बरगद(*Ficus Benghalensis*) etc. should be done at Amrit Sarovar work site

       on 15thAugust, 2022 by freedom fighter or her/his family member or by the family of martyr (post-independence) or a local padma awardee. In case there is no such citizen available, the eldest citizen of the specific/local gram Panchayat should be requested to lead the plantation.

    5. ## ***State/ District level committees:***

       1. For the effective implementation & coordination of Mission at the ground level, Committees will be formed at the State under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary and district level under the chairmanship of DM/DC respectively, with all the stakeholders involved.  
       2. The committees will ensure vertical and horizontal coordination and problem resolution as also monitor progress of the Mission from time to time.

    1. 	Peoples’ participation is the key to entire initiative, as it is meant to evoke collective spirit of the community.

    2. Peoples’ participation is required at all levels of Amrit Sarovar execution:

       1. Foundation stone for the Amrit Sarovar will be led by freedom fighter or her/his family member or by the family of martyr (post-independence) or a local padma awardee. In case there is no such citizen available, the eldest citizen of the specific/local gram Panchayat to be engaged.

       2. People may also participate by donating construction material, benches and by *Shram Daan.* It may also seek such support through crowd sourcing and CSR contributions. If village community desires beautification works on the Sarovar site, it may mobilize necessary donations.  
       3. Gram Panchayat will decide for a fair disposal of silt coming out of this Amrit Sarovar construction/renovation.  
       4. On the occasion of every Independence Day (i.e. on 15th August)Tricolor to be hoisted at Amrit Sarovar worksite, by the freedom fighter or his/her family member or by the family member of martyr or a local Padma Awardee.  
       5. Development of Amrit Sarovars is an occasion which celebrates 75 years of Azadi, therefore, all associated occasions including foundation laying, plantation, flag – hoisting on the eve of Independence Day and dedication to the community would include and engage elected representatives, PRI representatives, Self Help Groups, youth and school children. Needless to say, freedom fighter or her/his family member or by the family of martyr (post-independence) or the eldest citizen of the specific/local Panchayat would be given place of pride in all such events.  
       6. Possible users of such water structure, including for irrigation, fishery or water chestnut cultivation, should be identified and creation of their group encouraged. There should be full involvement of such association(s) during the entire process of development of Amrit Sarovar viz. feasibility assessment, execution, or its utilization.  
       7. Adhyaksha/Collector/CEO will felicitate all such Gram Panchayats after construction/rejuvenation of Amrit Sarovar.

Mission activities/progress will be regularly reviewed and monitored at various levels:

1. ***At Ministry/National level***

1. # **Committee** of **Secretaries convened by Department of Rural Development, GoI.**

2. **Joint Secretary (RE), Department of Rural Department, GoI would act as “Mission Director” for this Mission** to coordinate with the Central Scheme Nodal Officers (CSNOs)/other Central Ministries/Departments, Central Nodal Officers (CNOs) of JSA-CTR, State Nodal Officers (SNOs), District Nodal Officers (DNOs) and others.

3. **Central Scheme Nodal Officers (CSNOs): The in-charge Joint Secretary of the Scheme/Programme** will be the CSNO and she/he will monitor their respective programmes/Schemes.

4. **Central Nodal Officers (CNOs):** Each district will have one Central Nodal Officer (CNO) of the rank of Joint Secretary and above.**The Central Nodal Officers under Jal Shakti Abhiyaan-Catch the Rain campaign will also be the CNOs** for the Mission Amrit Sarovar.

   2. ## ***Role of Central Nodal Officer (CNO):***

The **Central Nodal Officers under Jal Shakti Abhiyaan-Catch the Rain** campaign will monitor the progress of AmritSarovar works also during their field visits.

# **Roles and Responsibilities of CNO is listed below: \-**

1. To keep oneself apprised of the planning and implementation of the Mission in the allotted district.  
   2. To review the progress and ensure timebound completion of the Mission.

      3. To visit some works of Amrit Sarovar during their field visits.

      4. Coordinate with the CSNOs, State Nodal officer and DNO for resolving the issues encountered in the district.

   3. ## ***State Level***

Each State /UTs will appoint a **State Nodal Officer (SNO).** It is suggested to appoint the **ACS/Pr. Secretary/Secretary I/C of the State Rural Development Department as the SNO** for the Mission, who shall be responsible for implementation, monitoring and overall outcome of the Mission in the State.

# **The Roles and Responsibilities of the SNO is listed below:**

1. Ensure coordination between participating counterparts and State Departments for smooth execution of the Mission in the State.

2. Extend support to participating Departments of the State for preparation and execution of Mission activities within the timeline.

3. Carry out a monthly review of the progress of the Mission and apprise Chief Secretary.

4. Ensuring action upon feedback by the Central Nodal officer on the issues encountered in district.

5. The SNO will be responsible for arranging regular updation of the data/response to the feedback given by CNOs.  
6. To ensure time bound completion of the Mission.

7. Documentation of achievements and outcome of Mission for the State.

8. Be responsible for media matters and coordination as also the resolution of grievances relating to Mission.

9. State Nodal Officers may assist the district in following the timeline and provide feedback to Central Government time to time through Central Coordinator for Mission Amrit Sarovar.

   4. ## ***District Level:***

The **District Collector/District Magistrate /Deputy Commissioner** will be the District Nodal Officer (DNO)and overall in-charge of the Mission at the district level. A committee of all stakeholders will be formed under the chairpersonship of District Collector/ District magistrate  
/Deputy Commissioner for the implementation and monitoring.

# **The Roles and Responsibilities of the District Collector/District Magistrate /Deputy Commissioner:**

1. Finalization of Amrit Sarovar site.

2. Implementation of the Mission and ensure its timebound completion.

3. Arranging preparation of Detailed Project report (DPR).

4. Earmarking sources of funding of arranging approval.

5. Ensure coordination among participating counterpart District level line departments.

6. Identify a Panchayat level Officer for each Amrit Sarovar Site

7. Carry out a monthly review of the progress of the Mission and apprise the State Nodal Officer (SNO)

8. Work upon the feedback provided including those by the Central Nodal Officer

9. Apprise Central Nodal Officer of the progress and issues, if any, concerning the Mission.

10. Documentation of achievements and outcome of Mission.

11. The District Magistrate/District Collector will monitor progress of Mission through Mission & program portals. She/he will also be responsible for arranging regular updation of data/response to the feedbacks .

12. Be responsible for the resolution of grievances and troubleshooting.

13. IEC and environment creation

    5. ## ***Panchayat level :***

       1. **Two dedicated Prabharis** for each Amrit Sarovar will be positioned i.e**. Panchayat Pratinidhi and Panchayat level officer.**  
       2. Gram Panchayat will nominate Panchayat Pratinidhi, who will act as citizen supervisor, will be responsible for faithful and fair execution of the Amrit Sarovar in the Panchayat while protecting the community interest.  
       3. Panchayat level officer will monitor the progress and ensure faithful implementation of the mission in panchayat while reporting the progress in the form of document, with appropriate photos and videos.

    6. ## ***Amrit Sarovar Portal and Mobile App :***

Amrit Sarovar Portal and Mobile App developed by Bhaskaracharya National Institute of Space Application and Geomatics-National (BISAG-N) will be used for tracking the progress/ performance of MissionAmrit Sarovar in districts. The link of web portal for the Mission Amrit Sarovar is https://water.ncog.gov.in/AmritSarovar.

7. ## ***Geo-tagging :***

All Amrit Sarovar constructed/rejuvenated will be geo-tagged at three different phases i.e. before the construction, during the construction and after the completion of asset creation using GeoMGNREGA app of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.

8. ## ***Use of Supervision tools of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS:***

   Amrit Sarovar will be utilising various supervision tools which is already being utilised for monitoring under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.

1. National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) : Real-time attendance at worksite Will be taken twice a day through National Mobile Monitoring System.  
2. Area Officer App: Area officer app will be utilised by collector CEO, ZP, BDO for inspection and monitoring of the gram Panchayat along with Amrit Sarovar worksite.

   1. Resources for this activity available from Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, XV Finance Commission Grants (both tied and untied), PMKSY-WDC, PMKSY-HKKP-RRR or similar schemes from the State/ Central Govt. either individually or in combination may be accessed for this purpose.  
   2. Public contribution (crowd funding/CSR) for the work is also allowed.

   3. Scheme funds should not be used for beautification works.

   1. District and States should separately document the entire initiative recording various stages of development of Amrit Sarovar, unique features of mobilization of the community, donations provided by the citizens etc.  
   2. Production of short films by Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.

   3. Separate National level detailed report will be documented on Mission Amrit Sarovar.

   4. 	Panhayat level Officer would also be responsible for uploading at least 3 videos of site viz. before commencement, during development and on completion and upload any other media documenting the development of Amrit Sarovars.  
   5. 	Ministries, States or Districts may also post progress, stories etc. on Social Media concurrently.

   **Mission Director for the Mission “Amrit Sarovar”**can be queried for details regarding the Mission at:

   Sh. Rohit Kumar

   Joint Secretary (RE)& Mission Director Department of Rural Development, Krishi Bhawan,New Delhi.

   Email: [jsppm-mord@gov.in](mailto:jsppm-mord@gov.in) Telephone : 011- 23383553