# **GOVERNMENT OF ASSAM**

# **FOOD, PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS (B) DEPARTMENT JANATA BHAWAN: DISPUR: GUWAHATI-06**

# **ORDERS BY THE GOVERNOR NOTIFICATION**

Dated Dispur, the	December, 2024

**No.E-555117/77:** In continuation of earlier Govt Notification No.E-555117/6 Dtd.18.09.2024, the Governor of Assam is pleased to notify the following additional Paddy Procurement Centres (PPCs) of **Assam Food & Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd. (AFCSCL)** for procurement of paddy in the State during **Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) 2024-25 (1st Crop):**

| Sl.No. | Agency | District | PPC | Target (in MT) |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 1 | AFCSCL | Dhubri | Bahalpur | 500 |
| 2 | AFCSCL | Hojai | Lanka | 500 |

**No.E-555117/77-A:** In partial modification of earlier Govt Notification No.E-555117/6 Dtd.18.09.2024, the following Paddy Procurement Center (PPC) of **Food Corporation of India (FCI)** for procurement of paddy during KMS 2024-25 (1st Crop) is hereby withdrawn with immediate effect.

| Sl.No. | Agency | District | PPC |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 1 | FCI | Bongaigaon | FSD Jogighopa |

(Smti Sangita Saikia, ACS)

Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam, Food, Public Distribution and Consumer Affairs Department,

Memo No.E-555117**/77**\-B	Dated Dispur, the	December, 2024 Copy to:

1. The Principal Secretary to the Hon’ble Chief Minister, Assam.

2. The Staff Officer to Chief Secretary, Assam, Dispur.

3. The Registrar of Co-operative of Societies, Assam, Samabai Bhawan, Khanapara, Guwahati- 781022\.  
4. The Commissioner of Taxes, Assam, Kar Bhawan, Dispur,Guwahati-781006

5. The Commissioner, Food, Public Distribution, Consumer Affairs & LM, Assam, Guwahati-7.

6. The Director, Agriculture, Assam, Khanapara, Guwahati-781022.

7. The Executive Director, Food Corporation of India, Zonal Office, North East Zone, G.L. Harlalka Publication Building, 6th Floor, Lachit Nagar, Guwahati-781007 for information.  
8. The General Manager (Region), Food Corporation of India, Assam Region, G.S. Road, Paltanbazar, Guwahati-781008 for information.  
9. The Managing Director, Assam Food and Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd., 4th Floor, Parivahan Bhawan, Jawahar Nagar, Khanapara, Guwahati-22 for information & necessary action.  
10. The State Head, National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED), 2nd Floor, Shiva Commercial complex, Block-B, Rupnagar Path, GS Road, Ulubari, Guwahati-07 for information.

***Contd….2***

***//2//***

11. The Chief Executive Officer, Assam State Agricultural Marketing Board (ASAMB), Ram Krishna Mission Road, Ulubari, Guwahati-781007 for information.  
12. The Managing Director, Assam State Warehousing Corporation, G.S. Road, Christianbasti, Guwahati-781005.  
13. The District Commissioner,	for information and necessary action.

14. The Principal Secretary/ Secretary, BTC/KAAC for information.

15. The Deputy Director, Assam Government Press, Bamunimaidam, Guwahati-781021 for information and necessary action.  
16. The P.S. to Hon’ble Minister, Food, Public Distribution and Consumer Affairs Deptt.,Dispur.

17. The P.S. to Hon’ble Minister, Agriculture Department, Dispur.

18. The P.S. to the Additional Chief Secretary to the Government of Assam, Food, Public Distribution & Consumer Affairs Department, Dispur.  
19. The P.S. to the Commissioner & Secretary to the Government of Assam, Agriculture Deptt., Dispur.  
20. Website.

21. Office copy.

    # **e-signed**

    Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam, Food, Public Distribution and Consumer Affairs Department